+++
title = "Noninvasive detection of lung cancer by analysis of exhaled breath."
date = "2009-08-01"
+++

Bajtarevic, Amel and Ager, Clemens and Pienz, Martin and Klieber, Martin and Schwarz, Konrad Eugen and Ligor, Magdalena and Ligor, Tomasz and Filipiak, Wojciech and Denz, Hubert and Fiegl, Michael and Hilbe, Wolfgang and Weiss, Wolfgang and Lukas, Peter and Jamnig, Herbert and Hackl, Martin and Haidenberger, Alfred and Buszewski, Bogusław and Miekisch, Wolfram and Schubert, Jochen K and Amann, Anton (2009), 
**[Noninvasive detection of lung cancer by analysis of exhaled breath.](https://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2407/9/348)** ,
*BMC Cancer (9)*,
doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-9-348

Background: Lung cancer is one of the leading causes of death in Europe and the western world. At present, diagnosis of lung cancer very often happens late in the course of the disease since inexpensive, non-invasive and sufficiently sensitive and specific screening methods are not available. Even though the CT diagnostic methods are good, it must be assured that "screening benefit outweighs risk, across all individuals screened, not only those with lung cancer". An early non-invasive diagnosis of lung cancer would improve prognosis and enlarge treatment options. Analysis of exhaled breath would be an ideal diagnostic method, since it is non-invasive and totally painless. Methods: Exhaled breath and inhaled room air samples were analyzed using proton transfer reaction mass spectrometry (PTR-MS) and solid phase microextraction with subsequent gas chromatography mass spectrometry (SPME-GCMS). For the PTR-MS measurements, 220 lung cancer patients and 441 healthy volunteers were recruited. For the GCMS measurements, we collected samples from 65 lung cancer patients and 31 healthy volunteers. Lung cancer patients were in different disease stages and under treatment with different regimes. Mixed expiratory and indoor air samples were collected in Tedlar bags, and either analyzed directly by PTR-MS or transferred to glass vials and analyzed by gas chromatography mass spectrometry (GCMS). Only those measurements of compounds were considered, which showed at least a 15\% higher concentration in exhaled breath than in indoor air. Compounds related to smoking behavior such as acetonitrile and benzene were not used to differentiate between lung cancer patients and healthy volunteers. Results: Isoprene, acetone and methanol are compounds appearing in everybody's exhaled breath. These three main compounds of exhaled breath show slightly lower concentrations in lung cancer patients as compared to healthy volunteers (p < 0.01 for isoprene and acetone, p
