---
date: 2008-08-01
title: The analysis of healthy volunteers' exhaled breath by the use of solid-phase
  microextraction and GC-MS
---

Ligor, Tomasz and Ligor, Magdalena and Amann, Anton and Ager, Clemens and Bachler, Miriam and Dzien, Alexander and Buszewski, Bogusław (2008), 
**[The analysis of healthy volunteers' exhaled breath by the use of solid-phase microextraction and GC-MS](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21386193 http://iopscience.iop.org/1752-7163/2/4/046006/)** ,
*Journal of Breath Research (2)*,
doi: 10.1088/1752-7155/2/4/046006

We analysed breath and inhaled room air samples from 39 healthy volunteers (28 non-smokers, 8 smokers and 3 ex-smokers) by SPME-GC-MS. Mixed expiratory and indoor air samples were collected in freshly cleaned Tedlar bags. Eighteen millilitres of each sample were transferred into sealed, evacuated glass vials, preconcentrated by solid-phase microextraction (SPME, carboxen/polydimethylsiloxane) and investigated by gas chromatography with mass spectrometric detection (GC-MS). For the unequivocal identification of potential marker compounds, pure calibration mixtures of reference compounds (depending on commercial availability) were prepared to determine the retention time and mass spectra with respect to our analytical setting. Applying the adapted SPME-GC/MS method with limit of detection in the high ppb range (0.05-15.00 ppb), we succeeded in identifying altogether 38 compounds with concentrations in exhaled breath being at least 50\% higher than concentration in inhaled air. From these 38 compounds, 31 were identified not only by the spectral library match but also by retention time of standards. A comparison of retention times and spectrum obtained for standards and determined compounds was performed. We found hydrocarbons (isoprene, 2-pentene, 2-methyl-1-pentene, benzene, toluene, p-cymene, limonene, 2,4-dimethylheptane, n-butane), ketones (acetone, hydroxypropanone, methylvinyl ketone), ethers (dimethyl ether, 1,3-dioxolane), esters (ethyl acetate), aldehydes (propanal, hexanal, heptanal, acrolein) and alcohols (ethanol, 2-metoxyethanol, isopropyl alcohol, 2,2,3,3- tetramethylcyclopropanemethanol, 3,4-dimethylcyclohexanol). Proper identification of compounds in different cohorts of patients and volunteers is the base for further investigation of origin, biochemical background and distribution of potential breath biomarkers.
