---
title: "Layout for the new year"
date: 2021-02-22T09:56:41+01:00
tags:
  - site
  - dev
  - hugo
categories:
  - site
---

I didn't blog much over the past year.
But having some time in the February break it was time to take this blog to 2021.

<!--more-->

Switching the computer and updating the layouts I ended up in a situation where the old site wouldn't build.

This was also a good chance to update the layout. 
I had some new ideas. 
In particulate I didn't want the publications take such a dominant spot on the main page. 

There were a few layouts on the [list of Hugo themes][hll]. However most felt to busy for me.
I wanted something putting a focus on recent Blog posts.

My favorites were: 
 - [ghostwriter][]
 - [kiera][]
 - [mainroad][]
 
[Ghostwriter][ghostwriter] was nice, but I didn't like how flashy and busy the top of the screen were. 
Trying to tune it I quickly noticed they heavily use npm to build the site - a thing I'd like to avoid. 
So at the end I decided to give other themes a try before investing more time.

[Kiera][kiera] was a theme that resonated with me extremely well.
Unfortunately I didn't get it to build my content.  
Hitting obstacles so early on is always a bad sign (keep in mind I'm aiming for a  minimalistic theme),
so I didn't want to put in more time I decided to move on.

[Mainroad][mainroad] is the theme I currently settle on.
The layout is simple enough for me, and I feel comfortable to add my own shortcodes. 
Though I will tone down the CSS a bit and maybe even create a dark mode.

So there's a lot for me to fix in the next weeks.
For now I'm happy enough that I can upload posts again. 


[hll]: https://themes.gohugo.io
[mainroad]: https://themes.gohugo.io/mainroad/
[kiera]: https://themes.gohugo.io/hugo-kiera/
[ghostwriter]: https://themes.gohugo.io/ghostwriter/
