---
title: "Github pages"
date: 2018-01-29T10:49:51+01:00
draft: false
tags:
  - github
  - site
  - config
  - hugo
categories:
  - today-i-learnt
---
Now this site is on [github pages](https://pages.github.com).  
I had already repos on github for some time and trusted it - only
private repos I keep on other places. But mostly I was
missing some features a bplaced so now the move.  Mostly I like that I
can now post new content via git so I just need to transfer new posts
and not the whole site.  That now the site is `https` secured is a
nice boon. 

It took me some time to reconfigure my [hugo](https://gohugo.io) blog for the pages here's what I learnt:

 - the name of the repo must be `username.github.io` - at first I had
   the impression `username` was enough, and also some guides would
   describe how to use gitlab instead.
 - for me github insists publishing the `master` branch - so I had to
   juggle around,  the previous master got renamed to hugo doing: `git
   branch -m master hugo`.  I had already ignored the `public`
   directory, and had to delete the original master from online and
   recreate it empty - but I think one can streamline that.
   Then added the master using worktree in public: `git worktree add -B master public origin/master`
 - the url in `config.toml` should be `https://username.github.io/` -
   notice the trailing slash.
 - I can then use the `hugo` command to build my site.  And publish
   using `cd public; git add . ; git commit -am pub; git push; cd ..`  - I'm in
   [fish](https://fishshell.com) -  many others use `&&` instead.
 - I tried putting my binaries under `git lfs` - so far it seems to
   work.  I will write back in case anything shows up.
 - It takes a minute till the change shows up. So I need to be
   patient.

So there we are on github now...
 
